website/content/en/integration.mdx, before:

import { Callout } from 'nextra/components'

# 4.Integrations

This chapter summarizes the integration status of the current codebase and provides copy-ready setup patterns.

## Verified integration matrix

The repository maintains real app fixtures under `apps/` and validates them in end-to-end tests.

| App fixture | Integration entry | Status |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `apps/vite-vue` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/vite` | Verified |
| `apps/vite-react` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/vite` | Verified |
| `apps/vite-svelte` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/vite` | Verified |
| `apps/vite-vanilla` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/vite` | Verified |
| `apps/nuxt-app` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/nuxt` | Verified |
| `apps/astro-app` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/vite` (inside Astro config) | Verified |
| `apps/next-app` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/webpack` | Verified |
| `apps/next-app-router` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/webpack` | Verified |
| `apps/webpack5-vue3` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/webpack` | Verified |

<Callout type="info">
If you add a new framework fixture, update the E2E matrix in `packages/unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/test/apps.e2e.test.ts`.
</Callout>

## Shared setup flow

Before enabling the plugin in any bundler:

```sh npm2yarn
npx tw-patch install
npx tw-patch extract
```

Then keep `prepare: tw-patch install` in your app scripts and point plugin `registry.file` to `.tw-patch/tw-class-list.json`.

## Framework-specific notes

### Vite family (Vue/React/Svelte/Vanilla)

Use `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/vite` and reuse `config.transformer` from your shared config.

### Nuxt 3

Use the Nuxt module entry:

```ts
import tailwindcssMangle from 'unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/nuxt'

export default defineNuxtConfig({
  modules: [[tailwindcssMangle, { registry: { mapping: true } }]],
})
```

### Astro

Register the Vite entry in `astro.config.*` and ensure the mangle config file is resolvable from the Astro app root.

### Next.js 16+

Current fixtures use the webpack adapter and run build with `--webpack`:

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "build": "next build --webpack"
  }
}
```

This avoids Turbopack custom-webpack conflicts when using the webpack plugin entry.

### Webpack (including Vue CLI)

Use `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/webpack`, and restrict `sources.include` to real transform targets (`js/ts/vue/css`) to avoid HTML template child-compilation interference.

## Monorepo workspace note

In workspace development, runtime package exports (`core`, `shared`, `config`, `tailwindcss-patch`) are resolved from `dist` entries. This keeps Next/Webpack runtime imports stable and avoids TS-source execution mismatches in config/build phases.

Commit message:

feat(monorepo): enforce boundaries and reorganize package e2e architecture

website/content/en/integration.mdx, after:

import { Callout } from 'nextra/components'

# 4.Integrations

This chapter summarizes the integration status of the current codebase and provides copy-ready setup patterns.

## Verified integration matrix

The repository maintains real app fixtures under `apps/` and validates them in end-to-end tests.

| App fixture | Integration entry | Status |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `apps/vite-vue` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/vite` | Verified |
| `apps/vite-react` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/vite` | Verified |
| `apps/vite-svelte` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/vite` | Verified |
| `apps/vite-vanilla` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/vite` | Verified |
| `apps/nuxt-app` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/nuxt` | Verified |
| `apps/astro-app` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/vite` (inside Astro config) | Verified |
| `apps/next-app` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/webpack` | Verified |
| `apps/next-app-router` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/webpack` | Verified |
| `apps/webpack5-vue3` | `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/webpack` | Verified |

<Callout type="info">
If you add a new framework fixture, update the E2E matrix in `e2e/apps.e2e.shared.ts`.
</Callout>

## Shared setup flow

Before enabling the plugin in any bundler:

```sh npm2yarn
npx tw-patch install
npx tw-patch extract
```

Then keep `prepare: tw-patch install` in your app scripts and point plugin `registry.file` to `.tw-patch/tw-class-list.json`.

## Framework-specific notes

### Vite family (Vue/React/Svelte/Vanilla)

Use `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/vite` and reuse `config.transformer` from your shared config.

### Nuxt 3

Use the Nuxt module entry:

```ts
import tailwindcssMangle from 'unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/nuxt'

export default defineNuxtConfig({
  modules: [[tailwindcssMangle, { registry: { mapping: true } }]],
})
```

### Astro

Register the Vite entry in `astro.config.*` and ensure the mangle config file is resolvable from the Astro app root.

### Next.js 16+

Current fixtures use the webpack adapter and run build with `--webpack`:

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "build": "next build --webpack"
  }
}
```

This avoids Turbopack custom-webpack conflicts when using the webpack plugin entry.

### Webpack (including Vue CLI)

Use `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle/webpack`, and restrict `sources.include` to real transform targets (`js/ts/vue/css`) to avoid HTML template child-compilation interference.

## Monorepo workspace note

In workspace development, runtime package exports (`core`, `shared`, `config`, `tailwindcss-patch`) are resolved from `dist` entries. This keeps Next/Webpack runtime imports stable and avoids TS-source execution mismatches in config/build phases.

## Package boundary guardrail

The monorepo now enforces package boundaries with a static check:

```sh
pnpm check:boundaries
```

Current boundary policy:

- `@tailwindcss-mangle/shared`: no cross-workspace package dependency, and no Node I/O imports (`fs`, `path`, `fs-extra`, etc.).
- `@tailwindcss-mangle/config`: can depend on `shared` only.
- `@tailwindcss-mangle/core`: can depend on `config` and `shared` only.
- `unplugin-tailwindcss-mangle`: can depend on `core`, `config`, and `shared` only.
- `tailwindcss-patch`: can depend on `config`/`shared`, and cannot depend on `core` or plugin adapter internals.

CI runs this check before build and test, so invalid package edges fail fast during pull requests.
